.\"	$OpenBSD: crypto.9,v 1.19 2002/07/16 06:31:57 angelos Exp $
.\"
.\" The author of this manual page is Angelos D. Keromytis (angelos@cis.upenn.edu)
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000, 2001 Angelos D. Keromytis
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, and modify this software with or without fee
.\" is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included in
.\" all source code copies of any software which is or includes a copy or
.\" modification of this software.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, NONE OF THE AUTHORS MAKES ANY
.\" REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE
.\" MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 17, 2019
.Dt CRYPTO 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crypto
.Nd API for cryptographic services in the kernel
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In opencrypto/cryptodev.h
.Ft int32_t
.Fn crypto_get_driverid "device_t dev" "size_t session_size" "int flags"
.Ft int
.Fn crypto_kregister "uint32_t driverid" "int kalg" "uint32_t flags"
.Ft int
.Fn crypto_unregister_all "uint32_t driverid"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_done "struct cryptop *crp"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_kdone "struct cryptkop *krp"
.Ft int
.Fn crypto_find_driver "const char *match"
.Ft int
.Fn crypto_kdispatch "struct cryptkop *krp"
.Ft int
.Fn crypto_unblock "uint32_t driverid" "int what"
.Ft "struct cryptkop *"
.Fn crypto_getkreq "uint32_t crid"
.Bd -literal
#define	CRYPTO_SYMQ	0x1
#define	CRYPTO_ASYMQ	0x2

struct crparam {
        caddr_t         crp_p;
        u_int           crp_nbits;
};

#define CRK_MAXPARAM    8

struct cryptkop {
        TAILQ_ENTRY(cryptkop) krp_next;
        u_int              krp_op;         /* ie. CRK_MOD_EXP or other */
        u_int              krp_status;     /* return status */
        u_short            krp_iparams;    /* # of input parameters */
        u_short            krp_oparams;    /* # of output parameters */
        uint32_t           krp_hid;
        struct crparam     krp_param[CRK_MAXPARAM];
        int               (*krp_callback)(struct cryptkop *);
};
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a framework for drivers of cryptographic hardware to register with
the kernel so
.Dq consumers
(other kernel subsystems, and
users through the
.Pa /dev/crypto
device) are able to make use of it.
Drivers register with the framework the algorithms they support,
and provide entry points (functions) the framework may call to
establish, use, and tear down sessions.
Sessions are used to cache cryptographic information in a particular driver
(or associated hardware), so initialization is not needed with every request.
Consumers of cryptographic services pass a set of
descriptors that instruct the framework (and the drivers registered
with it) of the operations that should be applied on the data (more
than one cryptographic operation can be requested).
.Pp
Keying operations are supported as well.
Unlike the symmetric operators described above,
these sessionless commands perform mathematical operations using
input and output parameters.
.Pp
Since the consumers may not be associated with a process, drivers may
not
.Xr sleep 9 .
The same holds for the framework.
Thus, a callback mechanism is used
to notify a consumer that a request has been completed (the
callback is specified by the consumer on a per-request basis).
The callback is invoked by the framework whether the request was
successfully completed or not.
An error indication is provided in the latter case.
A specific error code,
.Er EAGAIN ,
is used to indicate that a session handle has changed and that the
request may be re-submitted immediately with the new session.
Errors are only returned to the invoking function if not
enough information to call the callback is available (meaning, there
was a fatal error in verifying the arguments).
For session initialization and teardown no callback mechanism is used.
.Pp
The
.Fn crypto_find_driver
returns the driver id of the device whose name matches
.Fa match .
.Fa match
can either be the exact name of a device including the unit
or the driver name without a unit.
In the latter case,
the id of the first device with the matching driver name is returned.
If no matching device is found,
the value -1 is returned.
.Pp
Currently supported algorithms are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv CRYPTO_RIPEMD160_HMAC" -compact
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_CCM_16
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_CCM_CBC_MAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_ICM
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_NIST_GCM_16
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_NIST_GMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_AES_XTS
.It Dv CRYPTO_ARC4
.It Dv CRYPTO_BLAKE2B
.It Dv CRYPTO_BLAKE2S
.It Dv CRYPTO_BLF_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_CAMELLIA_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_CAST_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_CHACHA20
.It Dv CRYPTO_DEFLATE_COMP
.It Dv CRYPTO_DES_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_3DES_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_MD5
.It Dv CRYPTO_MD5_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_MD5_KPDK
.It Dv CRYPTO_NULL_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_NULL_CBC
.It Dv CRYPTO_POLY1305
.It Dv CRYPTO_RIPEMD160
.It Dv CRYPTO_RIPEMD160_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA1
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA1_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA1_KPDK
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_224
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_224_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_256
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_256_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_384
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_384_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_512
.It Dv CRYPTO_SHA2_512_HMAC
.It Dv CRYPTO_SKIPJACK_CBC
.El
.Pp
.Pp
.Fn crypto_kdispatch
is called to perform a keying operation.
The various fields in the
.Vt cryptkop
structure are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va krp_callback"
.It Va krp_op
Operation code, such as
.Dv CRK_MOD_EXP .
.It Va krp_status
Return code.
This
.Va errno Ns -style
variable indicates whether lower level reasons
for operation failure.
.It Va krp_iparams
Number of input parameters to the specified operation.
Note that each operation has a (typically hardwired) number of such parameters.
.It Va krp_oparams
Number of output parameters from the specified operation.
Note that each operation has a (typically hardwired) number of such parameters.
.It Va krp_kvp
An array of kernel memory blocks containing the parameters.
.It Va krp_hid
Identifier specifying which low-level driver is being used.
.It Va krp_callback
Callback called on completion of a keying operation.
.El
.Sh DRIVER-SIDE API
The
.Fn crypto_get_driverid ,
.Fn crypto_get_driver_session ,
.Fn crypto_kregister ,
.Fn crypto_unblock ,
and
.Fn crypto_done
routines are used by drivers that provide support for cryptographic
primitives to register and unregister with the kernel crypto services
framework.
.Pp
Drivers must first use the
.Fn crypto_get_driverid
function to acquire a driver identifier, specifying the
.Fa flags
as an argument.
One of
.Dv CRYPTOCAP_F_SOFTWARE
or
.Dv CRYPTOCAP_F_HARDWARE
must be specified.
The
.Dv CRYPTOCAP_F_SYNC
may also be specified, and should be specified if the driver does all of
it's operations synchronously.
Drivers must pass the size of their session structure as the second argument.
An appropriately sized memory will be allocated by the framework, zeroed, and
passed to the driver's
.Fn newsession
method.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_unregister_all
will unregister all algorithms registered by a driver
and the driver will be disabled (no new sessions will be allocated on
that driver, and any existing sessions will be migrated to other
drivers).
After a call to
.Fn crypto_unregister_all
there will be no threads in either the newsession or freesession function
of the driver.
.Pp
The calling convention for the driver-supplied routines are:
.Pp
.Bl -item -compact
.It
.Ft int
.Fn \*[lp]*newsession\*[rp] "device_t" "crypto_session_t" "struct cryptoini *" ;
.It
.Ft void
.Fn \*[lp]*freesession\*[rp] "device_t" "crypto_session_t" ;
.It
.Ft int
.Fn \*[lp]*process\*[rp] "device_t" "struct cryptop *" "int" ;
.It
.Ft int
.Fn \*[lp]*kprocess\*[rp] "device_t" "struct cryptkop *" "int" ;
.El
.Pp
On invocation, the first argument to
all routines is the
.Fa device_t
that was provided to
.Fn crypto_get_driverid .
The second argument to
.Fn newsession
is the opaque session handle for the new session.
The third argument is identical to that of
.Fn crypto_newsession .
.Pp
Drivers obtain a pointer to their session memory by invoking
.Fn crypto_get_driver_session
on the opaque
.Vt crypto_session_t
handle.
.Pp
The
.Fn freesession
routine takes as arguments the opaque data value and the session handle.
It should clear any context associated with the session (clear hardware
registers, memory, etc.).
If no resources need to be released other than the contents of session memory,
the method is optional.
The
.Nm
framework will zero and release the allocated session memory (after running the
.Fn freesession
method, if one exists).
.Pp
The
.Fn process
routine is invoked with a request to perform crypto processing.
This routine must not block or sleep, but should queue the request and return
immediately or process the request to completion.
In case of an unrecoverable error, the error indication must be placed in the
.Va crp_etype
field of the
.Vt cryptop
structure.
When the request is completed, or an error is detected, the
.Fn process
routine must invoke
.Fn crypto_done .
Session migration may be performed, as mentioned previously.
.Pp
In case of a temporary resource exhaustion, the
.Fn process
routine may return
.Er ERESTART
in which case the crypto services will requeue the request, mark the driver
as
.Dq blocked ,
and stop submitting requests for processing.
The driver is then responsible for notifying the crypto services
when it is again able to process requests through the
.Fn crypto_unblock
routine.
This simple flow control mechanism should only be used for short-lived
resource exhaustion as it causes operations to be queued in the crypto
layer.
Doing so is preferable to returning an error in such cases as
it can cause network protocols to degrade performance by treating the
failure much like a lost packet.
.Pp
The
.Fn kprocess
routine is invoked with a request to perform crypto key processing.
This routine must not block, but should queue the request and return
immediately.
Upon processing the request, the callback routine should be invoked.
In case of an unrecoverable error, the error indication must be placed in the
.Va krp_status
field of the
.Vt cryptkop
structure.
When the request is completed, or an error is detected, the
.Fn kprocess
routine should invoked
.Fn crypto_kdone .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn crypto_kregister
and
.Fn crypto_unblock
return 0 on success, or an error code on failure.
.Fn crypto_get_driverid
returns a non-negative value on error, and \-1 on failure.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa sys/opencrypto/crypto.c"
.It Pa sys/opencrypto/crypto.c
most of the framework code
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypto 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr crypto 7 ,
.Xr crypto_request 9 ,
.Xr crypto_session 9 ,
.Xr malloc 9 ,
.Xr sleep 9
.Sh HISTORY
The cryptographic framework first appeared in
.Ox 2.7
and was written by
.An Angelos D. Keromytis Aq Mt angelos@openbsd.org .
.Sh BUGS
The framework currently assumes that all the algorithms in a
.Fn crypto_newsession
operation must be available by the same driver.
If that is not the case, session initialization will fail.
.Pp
The framework also needs a mechanism for determining which driver is
best for a specific set of algorithms associated with a session.
Some type of benchmarking is in order here.
.Pp
Multiple instances of the same algorithm in the same session are not
supported.
